DOCS-2653: Update the training script docs (#3232)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/services/ml/upload-training-script.md

Once added to the [Viam registry](https://app.viam.com/registry?type=Training+Script), you can use the training script to build ML models based on your datasets.

{{< alert title="Note" color="note" >}}
For a no-code approach, you can [train TFLite classification and object detection models](/services/ml/train-model/) on the [Viam app **DATA** page](https://app.viam.com) or use existing [training scripts](https://app.viam.com/registry?type=Training+Script) from the Viam Registry.
{{< /alert >}}

Follow this guide to create, upload, and submit a Python script that loads a training dataset, trains an ML model, and produces a model artifact.

## Create a training script

1. Create a folder for the training-script, for example <file>my-training</file>.
1. Inside the top level folder (in this example <file>my-training</file>), create a file called `setup.py` with the following contents:

   ```python {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers" data-line="11"}
   from setuptools import find_packages, setup

   setup(

>        name="my-training",

Reviewer: super nit, but this should probably be called model

Reviewer: This is the convention we use for all the example training scripts but it's up to you

Author: It does describe the training script though right?but also it doesn't affect anything anyway, right?

       version="0.1",
       packages=find_packages(),
       include_package_data=True,
       install_requires=[
           "google-cloud-aiplatform",
           "google-cloud-storage",
           # TODO: Add additional required packages
       ],
   )
   ```

   Ensure you add additional required packages on line 11.

1. Inside the top level folder (in this example <file>my-training</file>), create a folder called <file>model</file> and create an empty file called <file>\_\_init\_\_.py</file> inside it.
1. Inside the <file>model</file> folder, create a file called <file>training.py</file>.

   {{< alert title="Using Viam APIs in a training script" color="note" >}}

>    If you need to access any of the [Viam APIs](/appendix/apis/) within a custom training script, you can use the environment variables `API_KEY` and `API_KEY_ID` to establish a connection.

Reviewer: Do you think it's worth having a snippet for the connection?

```
async def connect() -> ViamClient:
    """Returns a authenticated connection to the ViamClient for the requested org associated with the submitted training job."""
    # The API key and key ID can be accessed programmatically, using the environment variable API_KEY and API_KEY_ID.
    # The user does not need to supply the API keys, they are provided automatically when the training job is submitted.
    dial_options = DialOptions.with_api_key(
        os.environ.get("API_KEY"), os.environ.get("API_KEY_ID")
    )
    return await ViamClient.create_from_dial_options(dial_options)
```

Reviewer 2: We could also just say where to access this code snippet in app

           for line in f:
               json_line = json.loads(line)
               image_filenames.append(json_line["image_path"])

               annotations = json_line["classification_annotations"]
               labels = [unknown_label]
               for annotation in annotations:
                   if model_type == multi_label:
                       if annotation["annotation_label"] in all_labels:
                           labels.append(annotation["annotation_label"])
                   if model_type == single_label:
                       if annotation["annotation_label"] in all_labels:
                           labels = [annotation["annotation_label"]]
               image_labels.append(labels)
       return image_filenames, image_labels

   # Parse the dataset file (produced and stored in Viam) to get
   # bounding box annotations
   # Used for training object detection models
   def parse_filenames_and_bboxes_from_json(
       filename: str,
       all_labels: ty.List[str],
   ) -> ty.Tuple[ty.List[str], ty.List[str], ty.List[ty.List[float]]]:
       """Load and parse JSON file to return image filenames
       and corresponding labels with bboxes.
       Args:

>            filename: JSONLines file containing filenames and bboxes

Reviewer: This is my bad but args should all_labels: list of all N_LABELS here as well :)

Author: could you maybe suggest changes? I don't really understand what you want me to do. 
It's this button
![Screenshot 2024-08-12 at 18 19 44](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/df36aede-e6db-463e-a096-34d4d8eba453)

                       labels.append(annotation["annotation_label"])
                       # Store coordinates in rel_yxyx format so that
                       # we can use the keras_cv function
                       coords.append(
                           [
                               annotation["y_min_normalized"],
                               annotation["x_min_normalized"],
                               annotation["y_max_normalized"],
                               annotation["x_max_normalized"],
                           ]
                       )
               bbox_labels.append(labels)
               bbox_coords.append(coords)
       return image_filenames, bbox_labels, bbox_coords

   # Build the model
   def build_and_compile_model(
       labels: ty.List[str], model_type: str, input_shape: ty.Tuple[int, int, int]
   ) -> Model:
       """Builds and compiles a model
       Args:
           labels: list of string lists, where each string list contains up to N_LABEL labels associated with an image
           model_type: string single_label or multi_label
           input_shape: 3D shape of input
       """

>        # TODO: Add logic to build and compile model

Reviewer: Is this supposed to be a TODO? If so, I do think it would be helpful to have a working example, but I will defer to you

Reviewer 2: What would a working example look like?

Reviewer: [This](https://github.com/viamrobotics/docs/pull/3232/files#diff-3594b00458ec93c1fa54469b947146d47f304bedf08dbc11ec2f677e58ca13d1L212-L261) is what a working example would look like.

Author: Yes because it's a template. I could put an example with the explanation but this code relies on other methods so it's not that simple. And it would likely get outdated and not get updated

Author: I've added the examples

           for line in f:
               json_line = json.loads(line)
               image_filenames.append(json_line["image_path"])

               annotations = json_line["classification_annotations"]
               labels = [unknown_label]
               for annotation in annotations:
                   if model_type == multi_label:
                       if annotation["annotation_label"] in all_labels:
                           labels.append(annotation["annotation_label"])
                   if model_type == single_label:
                       if annotation["annotation_label"] in all_labels:
                           labels = [annotation["annotation_label"]]
               image_labels.append(labels)
       return image_filenames, image_labels

   # Parse the dataset file (produced and stored in Viam) to get
   # bounding box annotations
   # Used for training object detection models
   def parse_filenames_and_bboxes_from_json(
       filename: str,
       all_labels: ty.List[str],
   ) -> ty.Tuple[ty.List[str], ty.List[str], ty.List[ty.List[float]]]:
       """Load and parse JSON file to return image filenames
       and corresponding labels with bboxes.
       Args:

>            filename: JSONLines file containing filenames and bboxes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
           filename: JSONLines file containing filenames and bboxes
           all_labels: list of all N_LABELS 
```

Author: ahh gotcha, thanks, I thought you meant in the actual code

```

In your training script, you must parse the dataset file for the classification or bounding box annotations from the dataset metadata.
Depending on if you are training a classification or detection model, the template script contains the `parse_filenames_and_labels_from_json()` and the `parse_filenames_and_bboxes_from_json()` function.

{{% /expand%}}
{{%expand "Logic to produce model artifact" %}}

The next part of the script depends on the type of ML training you are creating.
In this part of the script, you use the data from the dataset and the annotations from the dataset file to build a Machine Learning model.

> As an example, you can refer to the logic from <file>model/training.py</file> from this [example classification training script](https://app.viam.com/packages/e76d1b3b-0468-4efd-bb7f-fb1d2b352fcb/custom-training-classification/ml_training/latest/e76d1b3b-0468-4efd-bb7f-fb1d2b352fcb) that trains a classification model using TensorFlow and Keras.

Reviewer: I was going to make a follow-up ticket after the epic was completed, but I think we can just link to these two Github repos/registry items now:
- https://github.com/viam-modules/detection-tflite, https://app.viam.com/ml-training/viam/detection-tflite
- https://github.com/viam-modules/classification-tflite, https://app.viam.com/ml-training/viam/classification-tflite

> As an example, you can refer to the logic from <file>model/training.py</file> from this [example classification training script](https://app.viam.com/packages/e76d1b3b-0468-4efd-bb7f-fb1d2b352fcb/custom-training-classification/ml_training/latest/e76d1b3b-0468-4efd-bb7f-fb1d2b352fcb) that trains a classification model using TensorFlow and Keras.

Author: ```suggestion
As an example, you can refer to the logic from the <file>model/training.py</file> from one of these training scripts:

- [detection-tflite](https://github.com/viam-modules/detection-tflite)
- [classification-tflite](https://github.com/viam-modules/classification-tflite)
```

{{% alert title="Tip" color="tip" %}}
You must log in to the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com/) to download the package containing the classification training script from the registry.
{{% /alert %}}

{{% /expand%}}
{{%expand "Saving the model artifact the script produces" %}}

> The `save_model()` and the `save_labels()` functions in the template before the `main` function saves the model artifact your training job produces to the `model_output_directory` in the cloud.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `save_model()` and the `save_labels()` functions in the template before the `main` function save the model artifact your training job produces to the `model_output_directory` in the cloud.
```

> Once a training job is complete, Viam checks the output directory and creates a package with all of the contents of the directory, creating or updating a registry item for the ML model.

Reviewer 2: nice

The next part of the script depends on the type of ML training you are creating.
In this part of the script, you use the data from the dataset and the annotations from the dataset file to build a Machine Learning model.

As an example, you can refer to the logic from the <file>model/training.py</file> from one of these training scripts:

- [detection-tflite](https://github.com/viam-modules/detection-tflite)
- [classification-tflite](https://github.com/viam-modules/classification-tflite)

{{% alert title="Tip" color="tip" %}}
You must log in to the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com/) to download the package containing the classification training script from the registry.
{{% /alert %}}

{{% /expand%}}
{{%expand "Saving the model artifact the script produces" %}}

The `save_model()` and the `save_labels()` functions in the template before the `main` function save the model artifact your training job produces to the `model_output_directory` in the cloud.

Once a training job is complete, Viam checks the output directory and creates a package with all of the contents of the directory, creating or updating a registry item for the ML model.

> As an example, you can refer to the logic from <file>model/training.py</file> from this [example classification training script](https://app.viam.com/packages/e76d1b3b-0468-4efd-bb7f-fb1d2b352fcb/custom-training-classification/ml_training/latest/e76d1b3b-0468-4efd-bb7f-fb1d2b352fcb) that trains a classification model using TensorFlow and Keras.

Author: ```suggestion
As an example, you can refer to the logic from <file>model/training.py</file> from this [example classification training script](https://github.com/viam-modules/classification-tflite) that trains a classification model using TensorFlow and Keras.
```

    model_name: str,
    target_shape: ty.Tuple[int, int, int],
) -> None:
    """Save model as a TFLite model.
    Args:
        model: trained model
        model_dir: output directory for model artifacts
        model_name: name of saved model
        target_shape: desired output shape of predictions from model
    """
    # Convert the model to tflite, with batch size 1 so the graph does not have
    # dynamic-sized tensors.
    input = tf.keras.Input(target_shape, batch_size=1, dtype=tf.uint8)
    output = model(input, training=False)
    wrapped_model = tf.keras.Model(inputs=input, outputs=output)
    converter = tf.lite.TFLiteConverter.from_keras_model(wrapped_model)
    converter.target_spec.supported_ops = TFLITE_OPS
    tflite_model = converter.convert()

    # Save the model to the output directory.
    filename = os.path.join(model_dir, f"{model_name}.tflite")
    with open(filename, "wb") as f:
        f.write(tflite_model)
```

{{% /expand%}}
{{%expand "The main function" %}}

The main function runs the training job by:

1. parsing command line inputs,
2. parsing the dataset and annotations from the dataset file,

> 3. producing the model artifact, and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. producing the model artifact
```
(opt) probably don't need that trailing and

For example:

```sh {class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}

> viam training-script upload --path=<path-to-tar.gz> --org-id=<INSERT ORG ID> --script-name=<org-id-or-namespace:training-script-name>

Reviewer 2: I thought having string was helpful in example to show that's how you do it-- maybe tabs here could be helpful?

{{% tab name="from-registry" %}}

```sh {class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}

> viam train submit custom from-registry --dataset-id=<INSERT DATASET ID> --org-id=<INSERT ORG ID> --model-name="MyRegistryModel" --model-version="2" --version="1" --script-name="mycompany:MyCustomTrainingScript"

Reviewer 2: good catch-- nvm maybe don't need tabs

Author: ok will leave as is then for now

{{% tab name="with-upload" %}}

```sh {class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
viam train submit custom with-upload --dataset-id=<INSERT DATASET ID> --model-org-id=<INSERT ORG ID> --model-name="MyRegistryModel" --model-type="single_label_classification" --model-version="2" --version="1" --path=<path-to-tar.gz> --script-name="mycompany:MyCustomTrainingScript"
```

> This command uploads a script called `"MyCustomTrainingScript"` to the registry under the specified organization and also submits a training job to that script with the input dataset, which generates a new version of the single-classification ML model `"MyRegistryModel"` and publishes that to the registry.

Reviewer 2: is the specified organization "mycompany"? ik it's org id but wondering where the mycompany comes in

Author: it's the namespace or org-id I believe
